Document "Import From Derivation" (#7332)
NixOS/nix: doc/manual/src/language/import-from-derivation.md

# Import From Derivation

The value of a Nix expression can depend on the contents of a [store object].
In this case, when that store object is needed, evaluation will be paused, the store object [realised], and then evaluation resumed.

[store object]: @docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-store-object
[derivation]: @docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-derivation
[realised]: @docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-realise

This has performance implications:

> Since evaluation is sequential, each required store object that is not already in the store will also be realised sequentially.
> Usually, if store objects are not already present, realisation is orders of magnitude slower than evaluation.

Reviewer: Not sure I quite got it but 
```suggestion
Since Nix's evaluator is sequential, Nix only discovers the store objects a Nix program requires one at a time.
If a given Nix program requires many store objects, and they are not already present realizing them one at a time is much slow than realizing them at once.  
```

1. "Orders of magnitude" means something precise, but without being concrete about what we are comparing we cannot be precise.
2. Realization itself still is parallel, just figuring out what to realize is sequential. (I still don't think my version fixes this enough.) It is an important distinction cause it means one can "batch" all the IFD at once if one is careful, which makes things a lot faster! E.g. I did that in https://github.com/obsidiansystems/obelisk/pull/1040

Obviously covering this technique is out of scope for the reference, but we should still be precise enough so that when `nix.dev` does the tutorial, the reference doesn't contradict it.

Even my "one at a time" is also wrong. Nix realizes string contexts one at a time, but a string context is a set which can refer to arbitrary many store objects. (And even if that weren't true, one could create a derivation whose only purpose is to create a store object referring to many other store objects, achieving the same outcome.)

- [`builtins.readDir`](./builtins.md#builtins-readDir)` expr`
- [`builtins.pathExists`](./builtins.md#builtins-pathExists)` expr`
- [`builtins.filterSource`](./builtins.md#builtins-filterSource)` f expr`
- [`builtins.path`](./builtins.md#builtins-path)` { path = expr; }`
- [`builtins.hashFile`](./builtins.md#builtins-hashFile)` t expr`
- `builtins.scopedImport x drv`

Realising store objects during evaluation can be disabled by setting [`allow-import-from-derivation`](../command-ref/conf-file.md#conf-allow-import-from-derivation) to `false`.
Without IFD it is ensured that evaluation is complete and Nix can produce a build plan before starting any realisation.

## Example

In the following Nix expression, the inner derivation `drv` produces a file with contents `hello`.

```nix
# IFD.nix
let
  drv = derivation {
    name = "hello";
    builder = "/bin/sh";
    args = [ "-c" "echo -n hello > $out" ];
    system = builtins.currentSystem;
  };
in "${builtins.readFile drv} world"
```

```shellSession
nix-instantiate IFD.nix --eval --read-write-mode
```

```
building '/nix/store/348q1cal6sdgfxs8zqi9v8llrsn4kqkq-hello.drv'...
"hello world"
```

> The contents of the derivation's [output path](@docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-output-path) have to be [realised] before they can be read with [`readFile`](./builtins.md#builtins-readFile).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The contents of the derivation's [output](@docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-output) have to be [realised] before they can be read with [`readFile`](./builtins.md#builtins-readFile).
```
This is scope creep, but it would be good to change that entry. "output path" is not a great: it is just a *store path* to a *derivation output*; there is no special notion of "output path", it is just the combination of those other two concepts.

Moreover, the contents of the "output *path*" is not `hello world`, it is `asidfaosidjfoiasdfu-hello`! :grin:

# Import From Derivation

The value of a Nix expression can depend on the contents of a [store object].

> In this case, when that store object is needed, evaluation will be paused, the store object [realised], and then evaluation resumed.

Reviewer 2: I think the first paragraph should have a short description of IFD. Currently one needs to read through 3 paragraphs to get to the first definition of IFD.

While realisation is always parallel, in this case it cannot be done for all required store paths at once, and is therefore much slower than otherwise.

[store paths]: @docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-store-path

Passing an expression `expr` that evaluates to a [store path](@docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-store-path) to any built-in function which reads from the filesystem constitutes Import From Derivation:

- [`import`](./builtins.md#builtins-import)` expr`
- [`builtins.readFile`](./builtins.md#builtins-readFile)` expr`
- [`builtins.readFileType`](./builtins.md#builtins-readFileType)` expr`
- [`builtins.readDir`](./builtins.md#builtins-readDir)` expr`
- [`builtins.pathExists`](./builtins.md#builtins-pathExists)` expr`
- [`builtins.filterSource`](./builtins.md#builtins-filterSource)` f expr`
- [`builtins.path`](./builtins.md#builtins-path)` { path = expr; }`
- [`builtins.hashFile`](./builtins.md#builtins-hashFile)` t expr`
- `builtins.scopedImport x drv`

Realising store objects during evaluation can be disabled by setting [`allow-import-from-derivation`](../command-ref/conf-file.md#conf-allow-import-from-derivation) to `false`.

> Without IFD it is ensured that evaluation is complete and Nix can produce a build plan before starting any realisation.

Reviewer 2: The IFD abbreviation isn't defined, should be in the beginning somewhere

This has performance implications:
Since evaluation is sequential, each required store object that is not already in the store will also be realised sequentially.

Passing an expression `expr` which evaluates to a store path to any built-in function that reads from the filesystem constitutes Import From Derivation:

- [`import`](./builtins.md#builtins-import)` expr`
- [`builtins.readFile`](./builtins.md#builtins-readFile)` expr`
- [`builtins.readDir`](./builtins.md#builtins-readDir)` expr`
- [`builtins.pathExists`](./builtins.md#builtins-pathExists)` expr`
- [`builtins.filterSource`](./builtins.md#builtins-filterSource)` f expr`
- [`builtins.path`](./builtins.md#builtins-path)` { path = expr; }`
- [`builtins.hashFile`](./builtins.md#builtins-hashFile)` t expr`
- `builtins.scopedImport x drv`

Realising store objects during evaluation can be disabled by setting [`allow-import-from-derivation`](../command-ref/conf-file.md#conf-allow-import-from-derivation) to `false`.

## Example

In the following Nix expression, the inner derivation `drv` produces a file containing `"hello"`.

```nix
# IFD.nix
let
  drv = derivation {
    name = "hello";

>     builder = /bin/sh;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    builder = "/bin/sh";
```

Don't copy `sh` from the evaluating host's FHS.
Fixes the expression for me.

That requires reading from the output [store path](@docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-store-path) of `drv`, which has to be [realised] before its contents can be read and evaluated.

## Illustration

The following diagram shows how evaluation is interrupted by a build, if the value of a Nix expression depends on realising a store object.

```
+----------------------+             +------------------------+
| Nix language         |             | Nix store              |
|  .----------------.  |             |                        |
|  | Nix expression |  |             |                        |
|  '----------------'  |             |                        |
|          |           |             |                        |
|       evaluate       |             |                        |
|          |           |             |                        |
|          V           |             |                        |
|    .------------.    |             |  .------------------.  |
|    | derivation |----|-instantiate-|->| store derivation |  |
|    '------------'    |             |  '------------------'  |
|                      |             |           |            |

> |                      |             |        realise         |

Reviewer 3: If I were to read this as a UML sequence diagram, `realise` would be an internal message presumably triggered by the creation of `store derivation`, whereas in truth instantiation is a number of "add to store" operations, and "realise" is another, independent message that follows the instantiation.
(Also it would take to the store about a derivation, rather than talk to the derivation)

A UML sequence diagram would also highlight that the evaluation process exists during the realisation, whereas this diagram only shows that the Nix language exists. Maybe change the block title from "Nix language" to "Nix evaluator"?

Author: I'd be open to pair on fixing the diagram. Admittedly it's a bit hand-wavy but I fear it would get too noisy if done technically correct.

Reviewer 3: Sgtm. Let me start with a proposal, based on my suggestion https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/7332#pullrequestreview-1535842400, highlighting that its derivation names aren't great yet:

```
┌───────┐     ┌─────────────┐         ┌─────────┐
│Nix CLI│     │Nix evaluator│         │Nix store│
└───┬───┘     └──────┬──────┘         └────┬────┘
    │                │                     │     
    │evaluate IFD.nix│                     │     
    │───────────────>│                     │     
    │                │                     │     
    │                │instantiate hello.drv│     
    │                │────────────────────>│     
    │                │                     │     
    │                │  realise hello.drv  │     
    │                │────────────────────>│     
    │                │                     │     
    │                │  hello.out = hello  │     
    │                │<────────────────────│     
    │                │                     │     
    │                │instantiate Hello.drv│     
    │                │────────────────────>│     
    │                │                     │     
    │ [ Hello.drv ]  │                     │     
    │<───────────────│                     │     
    │                │                     │     
    │          plan [ Hello.drv ]          │     
    │─────────────────────────────────────>│     
    │                │                     │     
    │        realise [ Hello.drv ]         │     
    │─────────────────────────────────────>│     
┌───┴───┐     ┌──────┴──────┐         ┌────┴────┐
│Nix CLI│     │Nix evaluator│         │Nix store│
└───────┘     └─────────────┘         └─────────┘

```

<details><summary>Source</summary>

https://arthursonzogni.com/Diagon/#Sequence

```
Nix CLI -> Nix evaluator: evaluate IFD.nix

Nix evaluator -> Nix store: instantiate hello.drv
Nix evaluator -> Nix store: realise hello.drv
Nix store -> Nix evaluator: hello.out = hello

Nix evaluator -> Nix store: instantiate Hello.drv
Nix evaluator -> Nix CLI: [ Hello.drv ]

Nix CLI -> Nix store: plan [ Hello.drv ]
Nix CLI -> Nix store: realise [ Hello.drv ]

```

</details>

[store object]: @docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-store-object
[derivation]: @docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-derivation
[realised]: @docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-realise

This has performance implications:
Since evaluation is sequential, each required store object that is not already in the store will also be realised sequentially.

Passing a store path to any built-in function that reads from the filesystem constitutes Import From Derivation:

- [`import`](./builtins.md#builtins-import)` expr`
- [`builtins.readFile`](./builtins.md#builtins-readFile)` expr`
- [`builtins.readFileType`](./builtins.md#builtins-readFileType)` expr`
- [`builtins.readDir`](./builtins.md#builtins-readDir)` expr`
- [`builtins.pathExists`](./builtins.md#builtins-pathExists)` expr`
- [`builtins.filterSource`](./builtins.md#builtins-filterSource)` f expr`
- [`builtins.path`](./builtins.md#builtins-path)` { path = expr; }`
- [`builtins.hashFile`](./builtins.md#builtins-hashFile)` t expr`
- `builtins.scopedImport x drv`

Realising store objects during evaluation can be disabled by setting [`allow-import-from-derivation`](../command-ref/conf-file.md#conf-allow-import-from-derivation) to `false`.

## Example

> In the following Nix expression, the inner derivation `drv` produces a file containing `"hello"`.
> 
> ```nix
> # IFD.nix
> let
>   drv = derivation {
>     name = "hello";
>     builder = "/bin/sh";
>     args = [ "-c" ''echo \"hello\" > $out'' ];
>     system = builtins.currentSystem;
>   };
> in "${import drv} world"
> ```

Author: ````suggestion
In the following Nix expression, the inner derivation `drv` produces a file with contents `hello`.

```nix
# IFD.nix
let
  drv = derivation {
    name = "hello";
    builder = "/bin/sh";
    args = [ "-c" "echo hello > $out" ];
    system = builtins.currentSystem;
  };
in "${readFile drv} world"
```
````

This makes for slightly less quotation noise.

Reviewer 3: This adds a newline after `hello`, because of `echo`.
Also I think we should use the IFD in a subsequent derivation to prove a point later with the `nix-build` log.

How about this:

````suggestion
In the following Nix expression, the inner derivation `drv` produces a file with contents `hello`.

# IFD.nix
let
  drv = derivation {
    name = "hello";
    builder = "/bin/sh";
    args = [ "-c" "echo -n hello > $out" ];
    system = builtins.currentSystem;
  };
  # import from derivation
  greeting = builtins.readFile drv;
in

derivation {
  name = builtins.replaceStrings ["h"] ["H"] greeting;
  builder = "/bin/sh";
  args = [ "-c" "echo ${greeting} > $out" ];
  system = builtins.currentSystem;
}
```
````

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
In the following Nix expression, the inner derivation `drv` produces a file with contents `hello`.

```nix
# IFD.nix
let
  drv = derivation {
    name = "hello";
    builder = "/bin/sh";
    args = [ "-c" "echo -n hello > $out" ];
    system = builtins.currentSystem;
  };
in "${builtins.readFile drv} world"
```
````

Add `echo -n` to make it work as expected.

Reviewer 3: > Not sure if it's still as snappy as `import drv`

Not using `import` is in line with the point that it's not just about `import`, but it might also confuse, as it's not quite as clear where the IFD happens.

````suggestion
In the following Nix expression, the inner derivation `drv` produces a file containing `"hello"`.

```nix
# IFD.nix
let
  drv = derivation {
    name = "hello";
    builder = "/bin/sh";
    args = [ "-c" "echo -n hello > $out" ];
    system = builtins.currentSystem;
  };
  # evaluating contents requires `drv` to be realised,
  # also known as import from derivation
  contents = builtins.readFile drv;
in "${contents} world"
```
````

```shellSession
nix-instantiate IFD.nix --eval --read-write-mode
```

```
building '/nix/store/348q1cal6sdgfxs8zqi9v8llrsn4kqkq-hello.drv'...
"hello world"
```

Since `"hello"` is a valid Nix expression, it can be [`import`](./builtins.md#builtins-import)ed.

> That requires reading from the output [store path](@docroot@/glossary.md#gloss-store-path) of `drv`, which has to be [realised] before its contents can be read and evaluated.

Reviewer 3: ```shellSession
nix-build IFD.nix
```

```
building '/nix/store/82wwfxkqsypldrg5dgmja87n5hsgqvzz-hello.drv'...
this derivation will be built:
  /nix/store/9b89bvwrvy5lss3cqf76l69a0hywls7w-Hello.drv
building '/nix/store/9b89bvwrvy5lss3cqf76l69a0hywls7w-Hello.drv'...
/nix/store/d22adm184zl3fdliapjb44q1sdxjbhrl-Hello
```

Note in the log that `hello` had to be built before Nix could compute its final plan. This is a consequence of using IFD to construct the final derivation.

Author: I had this originally, but it's a bit more than we really need to show, and is in general a more involved example that asks a lot of the reader to really grasp. The minimal structure is eval-build-read-eval.

Reviewer 3: Fair enough.

> # Import From Derivation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Reading build results
```

Author: Let us do the renaming in another pull request to focus on the essence of this one. See my [top-level comment](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/7332#issuecomment-1324800375).

Import From Derivation (IFD) is a Nix language pattern where an expression's value depends on the contents of a [store object] produced by a [derivation].

> It is characterised by the fact that the store object has to be [realise]d before the expression can be evaluated.

Author: Ah, true. We have to clear that up. Because we also say "realise a store object" meaning that "a store object comes into being".

> It is characterised by the fact that the store object has to be [realise]d before the expression can be evaluated.

Author: I reworked it [here](https://github.com/NixOS/nix/pull/7320/files#diff-8327b62197c4dd0503828bcdbbea4eca2bd37528c89e52378e77536ed8140b89R15-R17) to be consistent with common usage.

> Import From Derivation (IFD) is a Nix language pattern where an expression's value depends on the contents of a [store object] produced by a [derivation].
> It is characterised by the fact that the store object has to be [realise]d before the expression can be evaluated.
> 
> [store object]: /glossary.md#gloss-store-object
> [derivation]: /glossary.md#gloss-derivation
> [realise]: /glossary.md#gloss-realise
> 
> This has performance implications:
> Since evaluation is sequential, each required derivation will also be built sequentially.
> 
> Passing a derivation `drv` to any built-in function that reads from the filesystem constitutes Import From Derivation:

Reviewer: I'll use the "realize" word here as that is an orthogonal point.
```suggestion
Nix expressions can also depend on build results.

So far, we've only discussed Nix expressions that are either completely self contained, or depend on data that already exists (files on disk, something to be fetched, etc.).
But Nix expressions can also depend on build results, the [store object]s produced by [derivation]s., even if we haven't yet [realise]d that build result.
Evaluation will be paused if such a build result is needed, the build result realised, and then evaluation resumed.

[store object]: /glossary.md#gloss-store-object
[derivation]: /glossary.md#gloss-derivation
[realise]: /glossary.md#gloss-realise

This has performance implications:
Since evaluation is sequential, each required build result that the user doesn't already have in their store will also be built or downloaded sequentially.

Passing any expression that will evaluate to a [derived path] `drv^output` to any built-in function that reads from the filesystem constitutes Building-Dependent Evaluation:

[derived path]: /glossary.md#gloss-derived-path
```

- [`builtins.readDir`](./language/builtins.md#builtins-readDir)` drv`
- [`builtins.pathExists`](./language/builtins.md#builtins-pathExists)` drv`
- [`builtins.filterSource`](./language/builtins.md#builtins-filterSource)` f drv`
- [`builtins.path`](./language/builtins.md#builtins-path)` { path = drv; }`
- [`builtins.hashFile`](./language/builtins.md#builtins-hashFile)` t drv`
- `builtins.scopedImport x drv`

Building during evaluation can be disabled by setting [`allow-import-from-derivation`](../command-ref/conf-file.md#conf-allow-import-from-derivation) to `false`.

## Example

In the following Nix expression, the derivation `drv` produces a file containing `1` after `sleep`ing for 5 seconds.

Since `1` is a valid Nix expression itself, it can be [`import`](./builtins.md#builtins-import)ed.
That requires reading from the output [store path] of `drv`, which has to be [realise]d before its contents `1` can be evaluated.

[store path]: ../glossary.md#gloss-store-path

```nix
# IFD.nix
let
  drv = derivation {
    name = "expensive";
    builder = /bin/sh;
    args = [ "-c" "${/bin/sleep} 5; echo 1 > $out" ];
    system = builtins.currentSystem;
  };

> in import drv

Author: Good idea, it indeed makes the idea a bit more obvious. I will consider this.

```

```shellSession
nix-instantiate IFD.nix --eval --read-write-mode

> ```

Reviewer 4: This does not work for me, I think the Nix expression is wrong:
```
$ nix-instantiate ifd.nix --eval --read-write-mode
error (ignored): error: end of string reached
error: getting status of '/bin/sleep': No such file or directory
(use '--show-trace' to show detailed location information)
```

Indeed this line looks wrong:
```
args = [ "-c" "${/bin/sleep} 5; echo 1 > $out" ];
```

Author: Ah, that is because your system does not have `/bin/sleep`. Are you on NixOS?

I would like the manual to be self-sufficient. Importing Nixpkgs and all that stuff would make the example shorter, but also introduce lots of unrelated concepts that readers first have to understand to make sense of the example.

Unfortunately `sleep` is not a POSIX shell builtin, otherwise we could expect the default builder to just work with `sleep 5`. If you have an idea to achieve this with POSIX onboard means, that would be great.

Author: Fixed by removing the sleep and instead using a string. It's not important for the principle to focus on the expensive build step.
